IoT Edge Load-Aware Performance Transparency System
https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg

A simulated distributed IoT edge system that demonstrates load-aware performance transparency using Docker containers as virtual edge nodes (e.g., Raspberry Pi devices).

The system continuously monitors CPU utilisation, task load, memory usage, and response time across distributed nodes. When a node becomes overloaded, tasks are automatically migrated to underutilised nodes to maintain stable performance without modifying application logic.

This project was developed as part of the CS 535 – Distributed Systems assignment at Copperbelt University.

📚 Table of Contents
Overview

Architecture

Technologies

Prerequisites

Getting Started

Usage

Starting the System

Generating Load

Monitoring

Observing Load Balancing

Experiments and Evaluation

Project Structure

Contributors

License

Overview

In modern IoT edge environments, sensor data must be processed locally to reduce latency, bandwidth usage, and cloud dependency. However, workloads fluctuate unpredictably (e.g., environmental spikes, occupancy changes, or sensor bursts).

When one edge node becomes overloaded while others remain idle, system performance degrades unless adaptive mechanisms are in place.

Performance transparency means that the system automatically adapts to changing workloads without requiring changes to application algorithms or user interaction.

This project simulates a Distributed Edge-Based Smart Campus Environmental Monitoring System where multiple edge devices collaboratively process environmental sensor data and dynamically rebalance workloads when overload occurs.

What This Project Does

This system:

Simulates 5 edge nodes (Docker containers) representing campus buildings.

Each node runs multiple simulated environmental sensor-processing tasks (temperature, humidity, air quality, motion).

Continuously monitors:

CPU utilisation

Memory usage

Active task count

Throughput

Detects overload when CPU usage exceeds a configurable threshold (e.g., 80%).

Automatically migrates active tasks from overloaded nodes to underloaded nodes.

Measures system performance before and after adaptation.

The system evaluates:

Response time per task

Throughput (tasks completed per second)

CPU utilisation across nodes

Adaptation latency (time between overload detection and successful task migration)

The goal is to demonstrate how distributed systems can maintain consistent performance in dynamic IoT edge environments.

Architecture
Edge Nodes

Each edge node is a Docker container simulating a campus building.

Each node runs:

A Flask API for inter-node communication

A TaskManager for creating and controlling sensor-processing tasks

A metrics module using psutil to collect CPU and memory usage

Nodes expose:

/status – Returns CPU%, memory usage, and active tasks

/offload – Initiates task migration

/receive_task – Receives migrated task state and resumes processing

Central Monitor

A separate container continuously:

Polls all nodes for resource usage

Detects overload conditions

Selects the least loaded target node

Triggers task migration

The monitor logs all decisions for experimental evaluation.

Network

All containers communicate over a Docker bridge network, simulating a distributed campus environment.

Technologies

Python 3.9+ – Core logic

Flask – REST API for inter-node communication

Docker & Docker Compose – Containerisation and orchestration

psutil – CPU and memory monitoring

Requests – HTTP communication between monitor and nodes

Pandas & Matplotlib – Experimental analysis and plotting

Prerequisites

Docker (v20.10+)

Docker Compose

Git

Getting Started
Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/nqabasikeyi/iot-edge-load-balancing.git
cd iot-edge-load-balancing
Build and start containers
docker-compose up --build

This launches:

5 node containers (node1 … node5)

1 monitor container (monitor)

Verify containers are running
docker ps

You should see six running containers.

Usage
Generating Load

Use the load generator to simulate increasing sensor workloads:

python experiments/load_generator.py --nodes node1 node2 node3 node4 node5 --max-tasks 20 --step 2

This gradually increases processing tasks per node to simulate environmental spikes.

Monitoring System State

Check a node’s status:

curl http://localhost:5001/status

Monitor logs:

docker logs monitor -f

You will see:

Offloading task <id> from node3 to node2
Observing Load Balancing

When CPU usage exceeds the threshold:

The monitor detects overload.

The least loaded node is selected.

Task state is transferred.

Target node resumes processing.

You can verify task redistribution using /status endpoints before and after migration.

Experiments and Evaluation

Three experimental scenarios were conducted:

1️⃣ Baseline (No Load Balancing)

Offloading disabled.
Observe CPU saturation and response time degradation.

2️⃣ Load-Aware Adaptation Enabled

Same workload pattern with automatic migration enabled.
Observe improved CPU distribution and lower response time.

3️⃣ Scalability Test

Start with 4 nodes, dynamically add additional nodes during execution.

Metrics Collected

Response time per task

Throughput (tasks/sec)

CPU utilisation per node

Adaptation latency

All metrics are stored in:

experiments/results/

Use:

experiments/analysis.ipynb

to generate comparison graphs.

Project Structure
.
├── docker-compose.yml
├── node/
│   ├── Dockerfile
│   ├── app.py
│   ├── task_manager.py
│   ├── metrics.py
│   └── requirements.txt
├── monitor/
│   ├── Dockerfile
│   ├── monitor.py
│   └── requirements.txt
├── experiments/
│   ├── load_generator.py
│   ├── run_tests.py
│   ├── analysis.ipynb
│   └── results/
└── README.md

Contributors

Group Name: IoT Edge Performance Team

Nqaba Jabulani Sikeyi

Vivian Mwale

Jacqueese Ndukumana

Mwiche Silempa

Supervisor: Dr. Derrick Ntalasha

Acknowledgments

Copperbelt University – School of Graduate Studies

Dr. Derrick Ntalasha for guidance on distributed systems principles